RFC-5: Transformations and Coordinate systems (#255)
ome/ngff: rfc/wip-tform/index.md

# RFC-X Coordinate systems and transformations

Add named coordinate systems and expand and clarify coordinate transformations.

## Status

This RFC is currently in stage D2.

|  Role  | Name      | GitHub Handle | Institution | Date       | Status                                 |
|--------|-----------|---------------|-------------|------------|----------------------------------------|
| Author | John Bogovic    | @bogovicj       | HHMI Janelia   | 2024-07-30  | Author; Implemented               |
| Author | Davis Bennett   | @d-v-b          |                | 2024-07-30  | Author; Implemented validation    |                                 
| Author | Luca Marconato  | @LucaMarconato  | EMBL           | 2024-07-30  | Author; Implemented               |
| Author | Matt McCormick   | @thewtex       | ITK            | 2024-07-30  | Author; Implemented               |

> | Author | Stephan Saalfeld | @axtimwalde    | HHMI JAnelia   | 2024-07-30  | Author; Implemented (with JB)     |                                 

Reviewer: Typo JAnelia

- MUST contain the field "input", unless part of a `sequence` or `inverseOf` (see details).
- MAY contain the field "name". Its value MUST be unique across all "name" fields for coordinate transformations.
- Parameter values MUST be compatible with input and output space dimensionality (see details).

<table>
  <tr><th>`identity`
    <td> 
    <td>The identity transformation is the default transformation and is typically not explicitly defined.
  <tr><th>`mapAxis`
    <td>`"mapAxis":Dict[String:String]`
    <td> A `maxAxis` transformation specifies an axis permutation as a map between axis names.
  <tr><th>`translation`
    <td> one of: <br>`"translation":List[number]`, <br>`"path":str`
    <td>translation vector, stored either as a list of numbers (`"translation"`) or as binary data at a location
    in this container (`path`).
  <tr><th>`scale`
    <td> one of: <br>`"scale":List[number]`, <br>`"path":str`
    <td>scale vector, stored either as a list of numbers (`scale`) or as binary data at a location in this
    container (`path`).
  <tr><th>`affine`
    <td> one of: <br>`"affine":List[number]`, <br>`"path":str`

>     <td>affine transformation matrix stored as a flat array stored either with json uing the affine field

Reviewer: Leftover from the old specs, now the array/list is not flat but 2D/nested

    or as binary data at a location in this container (path). If both are present, the binary values at path should be used.
  <tr><th>`rotation`
    <td> one of: <br>`"rotation":List[number]`, <br>`"path":str`
    <td>rotation transformation matrix stored as an array stored either
        with json or as binary data at a location in this container (path).
        If both are present, the binary parameters at path are used.
  <tr><th>`sequence`
    <td> `"transformations":List[Transformation]`

>     <td>A sequence of transformations, Applying the sequence applies the composition of all transforms in the list, in order.

Reviewer: I'd clarify that if the list if `[f0, f1, f2]` the order is `f2 \circ \f1 \circ f0 = f2(f1(f0()))`

  <tr><th>`displacements`
    <td>`"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str`
    <td>Displacement field transformation located at (path).
  <tr><th>`coordinates`
    <td>`"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str`
    <td>Coordinate field transformation located at (path).
  <tr><th>`inverseOf`
    <td>`"transform":Transform`

>     <td>The inverse of a transformation. Useful if a transform is not closed-form invertible.  See Forward and inverse for details and examples.

Reviewer: typo, double space

│       ├── .zattrs
│       └── .zarray
│
├── volume
│   ├── .zattrs                 # group level attributes (multiscales)
│   └── 0                       # a group containing the 0th scale
│       └── image               # a zarr array
│           ├── .zattrs         # physical coordinate system and transformations here
│           └── .zarray         # the array attributes
└── crop
    ├── .zattrs                 # group level attributes (multiscales)
    └── 0                       # a group containing the 0th scale
        └── image               # a zarr array
            ├── .zattrs         # physical coordinate system and transformations here
            └── .zarray         # the array attributes
</pre>

### Additional details

Most coordinate transformations MUST specify their input and output coordinate systems using `input` and `output` with a string value
corresponding to the name of a coordinate system. The coordinate system's name may be the path to an array, and therefore may
not appear in the list of coordinate systems.

Exceptions are if the the coordinate transformation appears in the `transformations` list of a `sequence` or is the

> `transformation` of an `inverseOf` transformation. In these two cases input and output SHOULD be omitted (see below for

Reviewer: I'd replace "SHOULD be omitted" with something with the meaning of "could, in some cases, be omitted". Because sometimes they are required.

defines the function:

```
x = 0.5 * i
y = 1.2 * j
```

i.e., the mapping from the first input axis to the first output axis is determined by the first scale parameter.

When rendering transformed images and interpolating, implementations may need the "inverse" transformation - from the output to
the input coordinate system. Inverse transformations will not be explicitly specified when they can be computed in closed form from the
forward transformation. Inverse transformations used for image rendering may be specified using the `inverseOf`
transformation type, for example:

```json
{
    "type": "inverseOf",
    "transformation" : {
        "type": "displacements",
        "path": "/path/to/displacements",
    }
}
```

Implementations SHOULD be able to compute and apply the inverse of some coordinate transformations when they
are computable in closed-form (as the [Transformation types](#transformation-types) section below indicates). If an
operation is requested that requires the inverse of a transformation that can not be inverted in closed-form,
implementations MAY estimate an inverse, or MAY output a warning that the requested operation is unsupported.

> #### Matrix transformations

Reviewer: I'd clarify that for rotations, we have a standard matrix vector multiplication, but for affine, we need to add a row of [0, 0, ..., 0, 1] and add a 1 to the bottom vector before doing the matrix vector multiplication, i.e. we need to rewrite the matrix and vector in homogenous coordinates.

Author: Thanks, I made this clarification in the affine subsection, mostly through the examples, which I'm omitting from the rfc for brevity

Two transformation types ([affine](#affine) and [rotation](#rotation)) are parametrized by matrices.  Matrices are applied to
column vectors that represent points in the input coordinate system. The first (last) axis in a coordinate system is the top
(bottom) entry in the column vector. Matrices are stored as two-dimensional arrays, either as json or in a zarr array. When
stored as a 2D zarr array, the first dimension indexes rows and the second dimension indexes columns (e.g., an array of
`"shape":[3,4]` has 3 rows and 4 columns). When stored as a 2D json array, the inner array contains rows (e.g. `[[1,2,3],
[4,5,6]]` has 2 rows and 3 columns).

### Transformation types

Input and output dimensionality may be determined by the value of the "input" and "output" fields, respectively. If the value
of "input" is an array, it's length gives the input dimension, otherwise the length of "axes" for the coordinate
system with the name of the "input" value gives the input dimension.  If the value of "input" is an array, it's

> length gives the input imension, otherwise it is given by the length of "axes" for the coordinate system with

Reviewer: typo

Reviewer: imension -> dimension

> the name of the "input".  If the value of "output" is an array, it's length gives the output dimension,

Reviewer: typo

Reviewer: it's -> its

identical and MUST equal the the length of the "translation" array (N). `translation` transformations are
invertible.

<dl>
  <dt><strong>path</strong></dt>
  <dd>  The path to a zarr-array containing the translation parameters.
	The array at this path MUST be 1D, and its length MUST be `N`.</dd>
  <dt><strong>scale</strong></dt>
  <dd> 	The scale parameters stored as a JSON list of numbers. The list MUST have length `N`.</dd>
</dl>

#### scale

`scale` transformations are special cases of affine transformations. When possible, a scale transformation
SHOULD be preferred to its equivalent affine. Input and output dimensionality MUST be identical and MUST equal
the the length of the "scale" array (N). Values in the `scale` array SHOULD be non-zero; in that case, `scale`
transformations are invertible.

<dl>
  <dt><strong>path</strong></dt>
  <dd>  The path to a zarr-array containing the scale parameters.
	The array at this path MUST be 1D, and its length MUST be `N`.</dd>
  <dt><strong>scale</strong></dt>
  <dd> 	The scale parameters stored as a JSON list of numbers. The list MUST have length `N`.</dd>
</dl>

#### <a name="affine">affine</a>

> `affine`s are [matrix transformations](#matrix-transformations) from N-dimensional inputs to M-dimensional outputs are represented at `(N)x(M+1)`

Reviewer: I think there is an error: if N are the input and M are the output, then the matrix should have M rows and N + 1 columns, hence it should be (M)x(N+1).

Reviewer: If (N)x(M+1) is changed to (M)x(N+1) then it needs to be changed also in the text below.

matrices in homogeneous coordinates. This transformation type may be (but is not necessarily) invertible when `N` equals `M`.
The matrix MUST be stored as a 2D array either as json or in a zarr array.

<dl>
  <dt><strong>path</strong></dt>
  <dd>  The path to a zarr-array containing the affine parameters.

> 	The array at this path MUST be 2D whose shape MUST be `N x (M+1)`.</dd>

Reviewer: should be changed here.

  <dt><strong>affine</strong></dt>
  <dd> 	The affine parameters stored in JSON. The matrix MUST be stored as 2D nested array where the outer array MUST be length

>   `N` and the inner arrays MUST be length `M+1`.</dd>

Reviewer: and here.

  <dd> 	The  parameters stored in JSON. The matrix MUST be stored as a 2D nested array where the outer array MUST be length `N`
  and the inner arrays MUST be length `N`.</dd>
</dl>

#### <a name="inverseOf">inverseOf</a>

An `inverseOf` transformation contains another transformation (often non-linear), and indicates that
transforming points from output to input coordinate systems is possible using the contained transformation.
Transforming points from the input to the output coordinate systems requires the inverse of the contained
transformation (if it exists).

<div class=note>
    Software libraries that perform image registration often return the transformation from fixed image
    coordinates to moving image coordinates, because this "inverse" transformation is most often required
    when rendering the transformed moving image. Results such as this may be enclosed in an `inverseOf`
    transformation. This enables the "outer" coordinate transformation to specify the moving image coordinates
    as `input` and fixed image coordinates as `output`, a choice that many users and developers find intuitive.
</div>

#### <a name="sequence">sequence</a>

> A `sequence` transformation consists of an ordered array of coordinate transformations, and is invertible if and only if every

Reviewer: I'd rewrite the text to the following:

A `sequence` transformation consists of an ordered array of coordinate transformations. If all the coordinate transformations of the sequence are invertible, then the sequence transformation is also invertible. The opposite is not always true, but we add the constrain that all the transformations need to be invertible, because implementations may choose to apply a sequence transformation by applying the transformations one at the time.

Asking for feedback @d-v-b wdyt? Not adding this constraint would make implementations more complex because we can't apply a recursive logic to invert a sequence transformation.

> A `sequence` transformation consists of an ordered array of coordinate transformations, and is invertible if and only if every

Author: Thanks, I clarified the text a little (see below)

### the new text
> A `sequence` transformation consists of an ordered array of coordinate transformations, and is invertible if every coordinate transform in the array is invertible (though could be invertible in other cases as well). 

compare to
####  the old text
> A sequence transformation consists of an ordered array of coordinate transformations, and is invertible if and only if every coordinate transform in the array is invertible.

apply the first transformation in the list of transformations. Next, apply the second transformation to the result. Repeat until
every transformation has been applied. The output of the last transformation is the result of the sequence.

The transformations included in the `transformations` array may omit their `input` and `output` fields under the conditions
outlined below:

- The `input` and `output` fields MAY be omitted for the following transformation types: 
    - `identity`, `scale`, `translation`, `rotation`, `affine`, `displacements`, `coordinates`
- The `input` and `output` fields MAY be omitted for `inverseOf` transformations if those fields may be omitted for the
    transformation it wraps
- The `input` and `output` fields MAY be omitted for `bijection` transformations if the fields may be omitted for 
    both its `forward` and `inverse` transformations
- The `input` and `output` fields MAY be omitted for `sequence` transformations if the fields may be omitted for
    all transformations in the sequence after flattening the nested sequence lists.
- The `input` and `output` fields MUST be included for transformations of type: `mapAxis`, and `byDimension` (see the note

>     below), and under all other conditions.

Reviewer: (see the note below), I think this is a leftover text (had I reported it before in the main PR?) and should be removed.

> 

Reviewer: Not clear to me. Also I'd use list instead of array since array is used to represent the component of a single transformation.

The `i`th value of the array along the `coordinate` or `displacement` axis refers to the displacement
or coordinate of `i`th output axis. See the example below.

`coordinates` and `displacements` transformations are not invertible in general, but implementations MAY approximate their
inverses. Metadata for these coordinate transforms have the following field: 

<dl>
  <dt><strong>path</strong></dt>
  <dd>  The location of the coordinate array in this (or another) container.</dd>
  <dt><strong>interpolation</strong></dt>
  <dd>  The `interpolation` attributes MAY be provided. It's value indicates
        the interpolation to use if transforming points not on the array's discrete grid.
        Values could be:
        <ul>
            <li><code>linear</code> (default)</li>
            <li><code>nearest</code></li>
            <li><code>cubic</code></li>
        </ul></dd>
</dl>

For both `coordinates` and `displacements`, the array data at referred to by `path` MUST define space and coordinate transform metadata:

* Every axis name in the `coordinateTransform`'s `input` MUST appear in the coordinate system

> * The array dimension corresponding to the `coordinate` or `displacement` axis MUST have length equal to the dimensionality of the `coordinateTransform` `output`

Reviewer: Not sure, is it `output` or `output` + 1?

Reviewer: I didn't understand this point.

Author: Described this a bit more that I hope clarifies things.

* SHOULD have a `name` identical to the `name` of the corresponding `coordinateTransform`.

For `coordinates`:

> * coordinateSystem metadata MUST have exactly one axis with `"type" : "coordinate"`

Reviewer: coordinateSystem -> `coordinateSystem`

> * If a `coordinates`' input space has dimensionality `N`, then the array data at `path` MUST have dimensionality equal to `(N + 1)`.

Reviewer: typo: extra `'` to remove

Author: that apostrophe was actually meant to be a possessive  coordinates' ,
but it is confusing so I'll rephrase instead.

> * If a `coordinates`' input space has dimensionality `N`, then the array data at `path` MUST have dimensionality equal to `(N + 1)`.

Reviewer: isn't it the other way around? for `displacements` , the dimensionality equal to `(N + 1)`, but for coordinates, `N`.

Author: This  property is true for both `coordinates` and `displacements`.  I will try to write some more text to clarify.

> * the shape of the array along the "coordinate" axis must be exactly `N`

Reviewer: I don't understand what this means: * the shape of the array along the "coordinate" axis must be exactly `N`

Reviewer: Ah got it, I would maybe rephrase a bit, maybe say the "length of the array for the dimension of the `coordinate` axis". "shape` makes me think of `array.shape`, while here is `array.shape[-1] == n`.

Author: Yea, I'm referring to the shape field in the zarr's json (not python/numpy array shape). 
I could use "length" if it is clear enough that it refers to one entry of the shape...

For `displacements`:

> * coordinateSystem metadata MUST have exactly one axis with `"type" : "displacement"`

Reviewer: coordinateSystem -> `coordinateSystem`

> * If a `displacements`' input space has dimensionality `N`, then the array data at `path` MUST have dimensionality equal to `(N + 1)`.

Reviewer: typo: extra `'` to remove

Author: (same as above)

> * the shape of the array along the "displacement" axis must be exactly `N`

Reviewer: Commented above, I think here is `N + 1`, while for coordinates is `N`.

> * `input` and `output` MUST have an equal number of dimensions.

Reviewer: Commented above, I think there `output` dimensions = `input` dimensions + 1, while for coordinates we have that `input` and `output` MUST have an equal number of dimensions.

#### byDimension {#trafo-byDimension}

`byDimension` transformations build a high dimensional transformation using lower dimensional transformations
on subsets of dimensions.

<dl>
  <dt><strong>transformations</strong></dt>

>   <dd>  A list of transformations, each of which applies to a (non-strict) subset of input and output dimensions (axes). 

Reviewer: I think that maybe these conditions leave some edge cases open:
- the byDimension transformation could have a sub transformation whose output is not in the output axes of the byDimension output. Probably we don't want this.
- there could be multiple subtransformations that share some axes in their input, maybe it's ok, but not sure if we want this.
- there could be some input axes of the parent object that have no corresponding input axis in any of the sub transformations. I think that this is acceptable, but I wanted to highlight it here.

Author: > the byDimension transformation could have a sub transformation whose output is not in the output axes of the byDimension
> output. Probably we don't want this.

While I wouldn't recommend that, I don't think this is a problem - it seems unambiguous how to compute the transformation. e.g. 

```
{
  "coordinateSystems": [
    {
      "name": "in",
      "axes": [
        { "name": "j", "type": "array" },
        { "name": "i", "type": "array" }
      ]
    },
    {
      "name": "out",
      "axes": [
        { "name": "y", "type": "array" },
        { "name": "x", "type": "array" }
      ]
    }
  ]
  "coordinateTransformations": [
    {   
      "type": "byDimension",
      "input": "in",
      "output": "out",
      "transformations": [
        {
          "type": "translation",
          "translation": [ 1, 3 ],
          "input": [ "i", "j" ],
          "output": [ "x", "IGNORED" ]
        },
        {
          "type": "scale",
          "scale": [ 2, 3 ],
          "input": [ "i", "j" ],
          "output": [ "IGNORED". "y" ]
        }
      ]

    }
  ]
}
```

> there could be multiple subtransformations that share some axes in their input, maybe it's ok, but not sure if we want this.

Agreed that I would not recommend it, but don't think it is a problem. The above example applies to this as well.

> there could be some input axes of the parent object that have no corresponding input axis in any of the sub transformations. I think that this is acceptable, but I wanted to highlight it here.

Agreed.

Practically, non-invertible transformations have finite extents, so bijection transforms should only be expected
to be correct / consistent for points that fall within those extents. It may not be correct for any point of
appropriate dimensionality.

## Specific feedback requested

We ask the reviewers for one specific piece of feedback. Specifically about whether parameters for transformations should
be written as they are currently in the draft pull request, with named parameters at the "top level" e.g.:

```
{
    "type": "affine",
    "affine": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]],
    "input": "ji",
    "output": "yx"
}
```

or alternatively in a `parameters` field:

```
{
    "type": "affine",
    "parameters": {
        "matrix": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]
    },
    "input": "ji",
    "output": "yx"
}
```

In discussions, some authors preferred the latter because it will make the "top-level" keys for transformation
objects all identical, which could make serialization / validation simpler. One downside is that this change
is breaking for the existing `scale` and `translation` transformations

```
{
    "type": "scale",

>     "scale": [2, 3, 4],

Reviewer: typo: one extra number.

    "input": "ji",
    "output": "yx"
}
```

would change to:

```
{
    "type": "scale",
    "parameters": {

>         "scale": [2, 3, 4],

Reviewer: typo: one extra number.

### "coordinateSystems" metadata

A "coordinate system" is a collection of "axes" / dimensions with a name. Every coordinate system:
- MUST contain the field "name". The value MUST be a non-empty string that is unique among `coordinateSystem`s.
- MUST contain the field "axes", whose value is an array of valid "axes" (see below).

The order of the `"axes"` list matters and defines the index of each array dimension and coordinates for points in that
coordinate system. For the above example, the `"x"` dimension is the first dimension. The "dimensionality" of a coordinate system
is indicated by the length of its "axes" array. The "volume_micrometers" example coordinate system above is three dimensional (3D).

The axes of a coordinate system (see below) give information about the types, units, and other properties of the coordinate
system's dimensions. Axis `name`s may contain semantically meaningful information, but can be arbitrary. As a result, two
coordinate systems that have identical axes in the same order may not be "the same" in the sense that measurements at the same

> point refer to different physical entities and therefore should not be analyzed jointly. Task that require images, annotations,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
point refer to different physical entities and therefore should not be analyzed jointly. Tasks that require images, annotations,
```

> regions of interest, etc. SHOULD ensure that they are in the same coordinate system (same name, with identical axes) or can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
regions of interest, etc., SHOULD ensure that they are in the same coordinate system (same name, with identical axes) or can be
```

transformed to the same coordinate system before doing analysis. See the example below.

### "axes" metadata

"axes" describes the dimensions of a coordinate systems. It is a list of dictionaries, where each dictionary describes a dimension (axis) and:
- MUST contain the field "name" that gives the name for this dimension. The values MUST be unique across all "name" fields.

> - SHOULD contain the field "type". It SHOULD be one of "array", "space", "time", "channel", "coordinate", or "displacement" but MAY take other values for custom axis types that are not part of this specification yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- SHOULD contain the field "type". It SHOULD be one of the strings "array", "space", "time", "channel", "coordinate", or "displacement" but MAY take other string values for custom axis types that are not part of this specification yet.
```

- SHOULD contain the field "unit" to specify the physical unit of this dimension. The value SHOULD be one of the following strings, which are valid units according to UDUNITS-2.
    - Units for "space" axes: 'angstrom', 'attometer', 'centimeter', 'decimeter', 'exameter', 'femtometer', 'foot', 'gigameter', 'hectometer', 'inch', 'kilometer', 'megameter', 'meter', 'micrometer', 'mile', 'millimeter', 'nanometer', 'parsec', 'petameter', 'picometer', 'terameter', 'yard', 'yoctometer', 'yottameter', 'zeptometer', 'zettameter'
    - Units for "time" axes: 'attosecond', 'centisecond', 'day', 'decisecond', 'exasecond', 'femtosecond', 'gigasecond', 'hectosecond', 'hour', 'kilosecond', 'megasecond', 'microsecond', 'millisecond', 'minute', 'nanosecond', 'petasecond', 'picosecond', 'second', 'terasecond', 'yoctosecond', 'yottasecond', 'zeptosecond', 'zettasecond'
- MAY contain the field "longName". The value MUST be a string, and can provide a longer name or description of an axis and its properties.

If part of multiscales metadata, the length of "axes" MUST be equal to the number of dimensions of the arrays that contain the image data.

> Arrays are often thought of as containing discrete samples along the continuous variable. Axes representing space and time are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Arrays are often used to store discrete samples from a continuous variable. Axes representing space and time are
```

usually continuous, meaning they can be indexed by real-valued (floating point) numbers whereas discrete axes may be indexed
only by integers. Arrays are inherently discrete (see Array coordinate systems, below) , but values "in between" discrete

> coordinates can be retreived using an *interpolation* method.  If an axis is continuous (`"discrete" : false`), it indicates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
coordinates can be retrieved using an *interpolation* method.  If an axis is continuous (`"discrete" : false`), it indicates
```

that indexing with continuous values is meaningful, and that interpolation may be performed along that axis. Interpolation may
be performed jointly across axes with the same `type`, and interpolation should not be performed for discrete axes or jointly
across axes with differing `type`s.  Other non-continuous variables and axis types are also usually discrete, such as

> `channel`s, `coordinate`s, and `displacement`s.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should say that interpolation _may_ or _may not_ be performed. Generally, we should keep the normative statements restricted to the content of the metadata, rather than what actions people / software might take. We can instead make a non-normative statement to the effect that, for an axis with `{"discrete": false}` , smoothing and resampling of data values along this axis is a well-defined operation, whereas the same is not true for an axis with `{"discrete": True}`

Author: https://github.com/bogovicj/ngff/commit/dadff02cde9eb5dd76aa975702d9409a2d190c6e

Note: The most common methods for interpolation are "nearest neighbor", "linear", "cubic", and "windowed sinc". Here, we refer
to any method that obtains values at real valued coordinates using discrete samples as an "interpolator". As such, label images
may be interpolated using "nearest neighbor" to obtain labels at points along the continuum.

### Array coordinate systems

Every array has a default coordinate system whose parameters need not be explicitly defined.  Its name is the path to the array

> in the container, its axes have `"type":"array"`, are unitless, and have default "name"s. The ith axis has `"name":"dim_i"`

Reviewer 2: Why make the default name require information about where the array is stored in the container? This means that accessing the default coordinate system requires accessing the storage layer for the array, which rules out anything that acts exclusively on metadata. 

Perhaps it would be simpler to reserve a string like "default" for the default coordinate system.

Author: Because the coordinate systems of different arrays need to be different by default.

(these are the same default names used by [xarray](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/user-guide/terminology.html)).

The dimensionality of each array coordinate system equals the dimensionality of its corresponding zarr array.  The axis with
name `"dim_i"` is the ith element of the `"axes"` list. The axes and their order align with the `shape`
attribute in the zarr array attributes (in `.zarray`), and whose data depends on the byte order used to store
chunks. As described in the [zarr array metadata](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/en/stable/spec/v2.html#arrays),
the last dimension of an array in "C" order are stored contiguously on disk or in-memory when directly loaded. 

The name and axes names MAY be customized by including a `arrayCoordinateSystem` field in

> the `.zattr` metadata of the array whose value is a coordinate system object. The length of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the user-defined attributes of the array whose value is a coordinate system object. The length of
```

Avoid overfitting to zarr v2

`axes` MUST be equal to the dimensionality. The value of `"type"` for each object in the 
axes array MUST equal `"array"`.

### Coordinate convention

**The pixel/voxel center is the origin of the continuous coordinate system.**

It is vital to consistently define relationship between the discrete/array and continuous/interpolated
coordinate systems. A pixel/voxel is the continuous region (rectangle) that corresponds to a single sample
in the discrete array, i.e., the area corresponding to nearest-neighbor (NN) interpolation of that sample.
The center of a 2d pixel corresponding to the origin `(0,0)` in the discrete array is the origin of the continuous coordinate
system `(0.0, 0.0)` (when the transformation is the identity). The continuous rectangle of the pixel is given by the
half-open interval `[-0.5, 0.5) x [-0.5, 0.5)` (i.e., -0.5 is included, +0.5 is excluded). See chapter 4 and figure 4.1 of the ITK Software Guide.

### "coordinateTransformations" metadata

"coordinateTransformations" describe the mapping between two coordinate systems (defined by "axes").

> For example, to map an array's discrete coordinate system to its corresponding physical coordinates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, coordinate transforms can be used to map an array's discrete coordinate system to its corresponding physical coordinates.
```

    <td>Displacement field transformation located at (path).
  <tr><th>`coordinates`
    <td>`"path":str`<br>`"interpolation":str`
    <td>Coordinate field transformation located at (path).
  <tr><th>`inverseOf`
    <td>`"transform":Transform`
    <td>The inverse of a transformation. Useful if a transform is not closed-form invertible.  See Forward and inverse for details and examples.
  <tr><th>`bijection`
    <td>`"forward":Transform`<br>`"inverse":Transform`
    <td>Explicitly define an invertible transformation by providing a forward transformation and its inverse.
  <tr><th>`byDimension`
    <td>`"transformations":List[Transformation]`
    <td>Define a high dimensional transformation using lower dimensional transformations on subsets of
    dimensions.
 <thead>
   <tr><th>type<th>fields<th>description
</table>

Conforming readers:
- MUST parse `identity`, `scale`, `translation` transformations;
- SHOULD parse `mapAxis`, `affine` transformations;
- SHOULD be able to apply transformations to points;
- SHOULD be able to apply transformations to images;

Coordinate transformations from array to physical coordinates MUST be stored in multiscales,

> and MUST be duplicated in the atrributes of the zarr array. Transformations between different images MUST be stored in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and MUST be duplicated in the attributes of the zarr array. Transformations between different images MUST be stored in the
```
